Introduction
============

``ftw.pdfgenerator`` is meant to be used for generating PDFs from structured
data using pre defined `LaTeX`_ views. It is not useful for converting
full-html pages into `LaTeX`_ / PDFs, although it is able to convert small HTML
parts into `LaTeX`_.


Requirements
============

It is required to have a TeX distribution installed, which has a ``pdflatex`` executable.

These TeX distributions are recommended:

- Mac OS: `MacTeX`_
- Linux / Unix: `TeX Live`_
- Windows: `MiKTeX`_

The package is compatible with `Plone`_ 4.x.


Installing
==========

Add ``ftw.pdfgenerator`` to your buildout configuration:

::

  [instance]
  eggs =
    ftw.pdfgenerator

Usage
=====

The pdfgenerator uses LaTeX for generating the PDF. You need to provide a
layout and a view for your context for beeing able to create a PDF.

Defining a layout
-----------------

A layout is a multi adapter addapting ``context, request, builder``. You can
easily define a new layout using the `mako`_ templating engine
(example: ``layout.py``):

::

    >>> from example.conference.session import ISession
    >>> from ftw.pdfgenerator.interfaces import IBuilder
    >>> from ftw.pdfgenerator.interfaces import ILaTeXLayout
    >>> from ftw.pdfgenerator.layout.makolayout import MakoLayoutBase
    >>> from zope.component import adapts
    >>> from zope.interface import Interface
    >>> from zope.interface import implements

    >>> class SessionLayout(MakoLayoutBase):
    ...     adapts(ISession, Interface, IBuilder)
    ...     implements(ILaTeXLayout)
    ...
    ...     template_directories = ['session_templates']
    ...     template_name = 'layout.tex'
    ...
    ...     def before_render_hook(self):
    ...         self.use_babel()
    ...         self.use_package('inputenc', options='utf8')
    ...         self.use_package('fontenc', options='T1')


Register the layout with zcml (example: ``configure.zcml``):

::

    >>> <configure
    ...     xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope"
    ...     xmlns:browser="http://namespaces.zope.org/browser">
    ...
    ...     <adapter factory=".layout.SessionLayout"
    ...              provides="ftw.pdfgenerator.interfaces.ILaTeXLayout" />
    ...
    ... </configure>


Create a template as defined in ``SessionLayout.template_name``
(example: ``session_templates/layout.tex``):

::

    >>> <%block name="documentclass">
    ...   \documentclass[a4paper,10pt]{article}
    ... </%block>
    ...
    ... <%block name="usePackages">
    ...  ${packages}
    ... </%block>
    ...
    ... \begin{document}
    ... ${content}
    ... \end{document}


There are more methods on the layout, see the definition in
``ftw.pdfgenerator.interfaces.ILaTeXLayout``.


Defining a LaTeX view
---------------------

For every context of which a PDF is generated a LaTeX view (``ILaTeXView``)
is rendered. The view is a multi adapter adapting ``context, request, layout``.
There is a view based on the `mako`_ templating engine which can be extended
(example: ``views.py``):

::

    >>> from example.conference.session import ISession
    >>> from ftw.pdfgenerator.interfaces import ILaTeXLayout
    >>> from ftw.pdfgenerator.interfaces import ILaTeXView
    >>> from ftw.pdfgenerator.view import MakoLaTeXView
    >>> from zope.component import adapts
    >>> from zope.interface import Interface
    >>> from zope.interface import implements

    >>> class SessionLaTeXView(MakoLaTeXView):
    ...     adapts(ISession, Interface, ILaTeXLayout)
    ...     implements(ILaTeXView)
    ...
    ...     template_directories = ['session_templates']
    ...     template_name = 'view.tex'
    ...
    ...     def get_render_arguments(self):
    ...         return {'title': self.convert(self.context.Title()),
    ...                 'description': self.convert(self.context.description),
    ...                 'details': self.convert(self.context.details)}


Register the view with zcml (example: ``configure.zcml``):

::

    >>> <configure
    ...     xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope"
    ...     xmlns:browser="http://namespaces.zope.org/browser">
    ...
    ...     <adapter factory=".views.SessionLaTeXView"
    ...              provides="ftw.pdfgenerator.interfaces.ILaTeXView" />
    ...
    ... </configure>


Create a template with the name defined in the class
(example: ``session_templates/view.tex``):

::

    >>> \section*{${title}}
    ... % if description:
    ...   \small ${description}
    ... % endif
    ... \normalsize ${details}


Generating a PDF
----------------

When a layout and a view for the context is registered the PDF can be
generated by simply calling the view ``@@export_pdf`` on the context.


Recursive views
---------------

When extending from ``ftw.pdfgenerator.view.RecursiveLaTeXView`` and inserting
the variable ``latex_content`` in your template, the view automatically renders
all children for whoom a ``ILaTeXView`` is found.


HTML to LaTeX conversion
------------------------

``ftw.pdfgenerator`` comes with a simple but powerful HTML to LaTeX converter
which is optimized for the common WYSIWYG-Editors used in Plone.

The converter can be used:

 - in views, using ``self.convert(html)``
 - in layouts, using ``self.get_converter().convert(html)``

It uses regular expressions for the simple conversions and python
subconverters for the more complicated conversions. The converter is heavily
customizable.


Links
=====

- Main github project repository: https://github.com/4teamwork/ftw.pdfgenerator
- Issue tracker: https://github.com/4teamwork/ftw.pdfgenerator/issues
- Package on pypi: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/ftw.pdfgenerator
- Continuous integration: https://jenkins.4teamwork.ch/job/ftw.pdfgenerator/

Copyright
=========

This package is copyright by `4teamwork <http://www.4teamwork.ch/>`_.

``ftw.pdfgenerator`` is licensed under GNU General Public License, version 2.


.. _LaTeX: http://www.latex-project.org/
.. _Plone: http://www.plone.org/
.. _MacTeX: http://www.tug.org/mactex/2011/
.. _Tex Live: http://www.tug.org/texlive/
.. _MiKTeX: http://www.miktex.org/
.. _mako: http://www.makotemplates.org/
